Track 5. The almost lifeless lake at Glaslin.
Yeah, Glaslin is what's known in conservation terms as oligotrophic, which basically means it's nutrient poor.
There's no inlet to it, it's rainwater fed, so obviously we've got a lot of rain here.
That's why Wales is so green. The rainwater trickles through the peat and the heather moorland into this little glacial depression.
Because of this, barely anything can survive in its clear waters.
However, one specially adapted species, with a few years of evolution behind it,
fucks this trend, as Clive Faulkner and then his colleague Tammy Stretton reveal.
In the lake here beside me there's a beautiful fern.
But it's not a fern like you would know. It looks like a leek or a tuft of something.
It's a peculiar looking thing, it looks like a little sprout.
But this fern is growing on the bottom of the lake.
And it's a very ancient sort of plant.
Before ferns it evolved millions and millions of years ago.
Before the dinosaurs, so far back in time that actually it was the most complex sort of plant on the planet.
And in those days they grew as mighty forests.
And as the plants have evolved over the millennia,
we've seen more and more complicated species come along and they've pushed out these ancient species.
And they've moved them to the most extreme locations.
And so now that particular sort of plant, a quillwort as it's called now,
has been pushed to the most extreme places on the top of a mountain at the bottom of a lake.
And there they persist to be spotted by the canny eye of the careful observer.
And I think that's a fantastic story.
You don't tend to generally see it obviously because it's in the water,
but if there's been a kind of a storm or strong winds like we've got today,
you can get it washed up on the shoreline. So it's worth having a look out on the shore for it.
At first glance the wildlife around the lake may appear relatively minimal too.
But take a look in the small pools and waterlogged areas within the heather.
And you may discover a dark world.
If you are an insect anyway.
And the pools themselves can provide habitats for frogs and toads,
for dragonflies and damselflies, and some unusual plants as well.
In the blanket bog areas there's a little plant called a sundew, which is very, very tiny,
but it's insectivorous and it's got sticky little globules on it, which it catches insects.
Now it doesn't rely on those completely.
It still photosynthesises like other plants do, getting the energy from the sun.
But because bogs are very nutrient poor, they supplement their diet, if you like, with insects.
Turn right along the northern edge of the lake and cross over a small wooden boardwalk bridge.
Continue ahead through a metal gate and pass the Montgomeryshire Wildlife Trust plaque on your right.
Shortly after, listen to track 6, besides the small sign directing walkers to the viewpoint.